# Database Systems Overview

#### 1. What database models do you know?
* Hierarchical
* Network
* Relational
* Object-oriented

#### 2. Which are the main functions performed by a Relational Database Management System (RDBMS)?
* Create, modify, delete tables and relations between them
* Add, modify, delete, search, retrieve data stored in the table
* Provides multi-user accessibility

#### 3. Define what is "table" in database terms.
* Table contains rows and columns
* Each column has name and type
* The number of columns is specified
* All rows have the same structure
* Table can contain any number of rows
* Cells are the place where rows and columns intersect and contain data
* Each row is identified by one or more values in its cells
* Column or combination of several columns which contain unique identifiers is called _primary key_

#### 4. Explain the difference between a primary and a foreign key.
* Primary key is unique for each row in a table
* Two rows are different only if their primary keys are different
* Primary key can be composite - combination of several columns
* Foreign key can be composite - combination of several columns
* Foreign key is field in a table that uniquely identifies row from another table
* Foreign key is defined in one table but refers to the primary key of another table
* Table can contain only one primary key
* Table can contain multiple foreign keys
* Foreign key can refer to the same table and is called _recursive_

#### 5. Explain the different kinds of relationships between tables in relational databases.
* The use of relationships allows avoiding duplicate data in the database
* Column from one table can point to another table
* One-to-many - parent record in one table can reference several child records in another table. Child cannot have more than one parent record
* Many-to-many - parent records in one table can reference child records in another table and vice versa
* One-to-one - parent record in one table can reference one record in another table

#### 6. When is a certain database schema normalized? What are the advantages of normalized databases?
* The main goal of normalization is minimizing data redundancy in relational database
* Database schema must be normalized when the schema contains many data repetitions
* Advantages
    * Provide indexing - create primary key
    * Minimize modification anomalies - anomalies occur when data is inserted, updated or deleted
    * Reduce table/row size - separate data from one table into several tables

#### 7. What are database integrity constraints and when are they used?
* Integrity constraints are used to ensure accuracy and consistency of data in a relational database. Data integrity is handled in a relational database through the concept of referential integrity. Many types of integrity constraints play a role in referential integrity (RI).
* Data cleanliness - Constraints verify that the data in the data warehouse conforms to a basic level of data consistency and correctness, preventing the introduction of dirty data.
* Primary key constraints - uniquely identified each rows/records in a database table
* Unique constraints - to ensure that a given column is unique
* Not null constraints - to ensure that no null values are allowed
* Foreign key constraints - to ensure that two keys share a primary key to foreign key relationship
* Check constraints - to ensure that all values in a column satisfy certain conditions
* Default constraints - provides a default value for a column when none is specified.

#### 8. Point out the pros and cons of using indexes in a database.
* advantages
    * quick access to specific information (retrieve)
    * speed up search for values in column or several columns
    * unique indexes guarantee uniquely identifiable records in the database
* disadvantages
    * take up disk space
    * reduce the speed of update and insert
    * reduce the speed of delete

#### 9. What's the main purpose of the SQL language?
* Manipulation of data held in relational database management system or for stream processing in a relational data stream management system (RDSMS).

#### 10. What are transactions used for? Give an example.
* Sequence of database operations which are executed as a single unit. Transactions are units or sequences of work accomplished in a logical order, whether in a manual fashion by a user or automatically by some sort of a database program. Transactions are either executed successfully, or not executed at all.

#### 11. What is a NoSQL database?
* A non-relational database is a database that does not incorporate the table/key model that relational database management systems (RDBMS) promote. These kinds of databases require data manipulation techniques and processes designed to provide solutions to big data problems that big companies face
* NoSQL use document-based model - data is stored as documents
* Schema-free document storage
* Great performance with huge amount of data